Update service rules for schools (#325)
DFE-Digital/register-early-career-teachers-public: documentation/service-rules/school-admins.md

title: School admins in Register early career teachers
---

This document covers how the new Register early career teachers service will work for school users.

> In the service, we ask schools for information about ECTs and their mentors so DfE can:

Author: You're right!

* in research, most school users had an understanding of DfE Sign in
* access to the service historically worked through using info from Get information about schools, but many schools weren’t aware of this
* it still makes sure the person accessing the service actually works for the school by going through an approval process

You can read more about why we chose to do this in [our design history](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/exploring-using-dfe-sign-in/).

To get access to the service, a school will need to request for approval. This is checked and actioned by whoever at their school has approval permissions. Once this is done, they will be able to sign into the service and view the records for their school.

### Number of users that can access the service

We will not limit the number of users per school. This means multiple people can get access, unlike in ECF1. Schools will manage the users who can access the service for their school themselves via DfE Sign In.

You can read more about [why we made this decision in our design history](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/allowing-multiple-school-accounts/).

> <a id="giving_details_for_an_ect"></a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Giving details for an ECT

### Finding an ECT’s record in the Teaching Record System

When a school registers an ECT, we need to find the ECT’s TRS record so that we can check they are a real person, that the school knows them and so that we can determine their eligibility for training.

To find an ECT’s teacher record, we need to check the Teaching Record System (TRS) API. The ECT needs a TRN and a teacher record to be eligible for training.

To do this, we ask for the ECT’s TRN and date of birth.

We should always ask for two fields of personal information before registering an ECT’s record. This is because we need to make sure the person registering the ECT actually knows that ECT. If we just ask for TRN, they could be entering a random number.

If we can’t find a matching TRN that exists, we tell the user the ECT’s teacher record cannot be found.

> If we can’t find the ECT’s record in the Teaching Record System API, but the TRN does exist, we ask for that ECT’s national insurance number instead. We do this because potentially the date of birth stored on the teacher’s record in the TRS is incorrect, or the one the school holds might be. It makes it more likely for the user to find the ECT’s teacher record and confirm they know them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we can find a record in TRS matching the ECT's TRN but not the provided date of birth, we ask for the ECT's national insurance number instead.
We do this because potentially the date of birth stored on the teacher’s record in the TRS is incorrect, or the one the school holds might be. It makes it more likely for the user to find the ECT’s teacher record and confirm they know them.
```

If we still cannot confirm the user knows both the TRN and either national insurance number or date of birth, we tell them the record cannot be found.

> Neither date of birth or national insurance number should be stored longer-term. It is just used for the initial finding and checking of an ECT’s record in the TRS. You can read more [about our reasoning for this here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/no-longer-storing-date-of-birth/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Neither date of birth or national insurance number should be stored longer-term in Register ECTs service. It is just used for the initial finding and checking of an ECT’s record in the TRS. You can read more [about our reasoning for this here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/no-longer-storing-date-of-birth/).
```

### Checking the ECT is eligible to be registered for training

> When an ECT is registered for training, we should check if their record already exists in CPD.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an ECT is being registered for training, we should check if their record already exists in CPD.
```

Author: good spot

> If the ECT being registered already exists as a mentor, we should not let them progress with registration. This is because a mentor undergoing ECT training is highly unlikely and it’s probably a mistake.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the ECT already exists registered as a mentor, we should not let them progress with registration. This is because a mentor undergoing ECT training is highly unlikely and it’s probably a mistake.
```

title: School admins in Register early career teachers
---

This document covers how the new Register early career teachers service will work for school users.

In the service, we ask schools for information about early career teachers (ECTs) and their mentors so DfE can:

* make sure they’re trained as an early career teacher or a mentor
* send funding to schools to give them time off timetable for training or mentoring
* publish statistics on how early career teaching programmes are performing

These are the rules of how the service will work that we have determined so far. We’ll continue to add to this over time.

School users are also known as:

* school admins
* school induction tutors (SITs)
* school induction coordinators

## How the service works for schools

[Accessing the service](#accessing_the_service)

> [Giving details for an early career teacher](#giving_details_for_an_ect)

Reviewer 3: This hyperlink doesn't seem to work?

Author: ive tried to fix it but im not sure why it wont work work :(

If we can find a record in the teaching record system (TRS) matching the ECT's TRN but not the provided date of birth, we ask for the ECT's national insurance number instead.

We do this because potentially the date of birth stored on the teacher’s record in the TRS is incorrect, or the one the school holds might be. It makes it more likely for the user to find the ECT’s teacher record and confirm they know them.

If we still cannot confirm the user knows both the TRN and either national insurance number or date of birth, we tell them the record cannot be found.

Neither date of birth or national insurance number should be stored longer-term in the Register ECTs service. It is just used for the initial finding and checking of an ECT’s record in the TRS. You can read more [about our reasoning for this here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/no-longer-storing-date-of-birth/).

### Checking the ECT is eligible to be registered for training

When an ECT is being registered for training, we should check if their record already exists in the Register ECTs service.

> If the ECT already exists as a registered mentor, we should not let them progress with registration. This is because a mentor undergoing ECT training is highly unlikely and it’s probably a mistake.

Reviewer 3: I think we decided not to block this - we only block that an ECT can't be assigned as their own mentor

Author: you'tre right will fix

If the ECT being registered already exists as an ‘in progress’ or ‘completed’ ECT at their school, we should not let them progress with registration. This is because the ECT record already exists and we do not want duplicates. If the ECT has ‘left’ their school, we should still let them progress with registration, as the ECT may have returned.

At this stage, when we check the TRS for the existence of the ECT’s record, we also need to make sure:

* the ECT has not completed induction already
* the ECT is not exempt from induction

> 

Reviewer 3: the ECT has not failed induction in England

* we know the name held in the TRS is often out of date
* we want lead providers to have correct contact details for ECTs
* we don’t want to block schools from registering someone because the name of the ECT may have been updated

If the name is corrected, we will continue to show the corrected name in the service from this point. We will continue to store the name from the TRS, so we can monitor if this feature is being used correctly, and it’s not being overwritten with names that are completely different.

You can read more about why we chose to change how an ECT’s name is gathered [in the design history entry here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/correcting-names/).

### Giving an ECT’s email address

The school user is asked for that ECT’s email address.

We tell them they can update the email at a later point. This is because we know sometimes school users register ECTs in advance, when their school email address might not be ready yet.

> We check the email address given and make sure it doesn’t exist for an ongoing ECT or mentor record with a different TRN. This would mean any emails that are attached to an open `ect_at_school_period`. This is because we shouldn’t have email addresses that are the same for entirely different people, when both are are still undergoing training.

Reviewer 3: or mentor_at_school_period

This may be because one of the organisations has stopped providing services in a role, a lead provider and delivery partner are no longer working together to deliver training. This means their 'previously used choices' are no longer valid options. This would typically happen when a school is registering an ECT in a new academic year for the first time.

This comes from when we expected the ECT to start training - their expected training start year, defined above. If the lead provider or delivery partner are no longer working together or at all individually in the expected training start year of an ECT, we wouldn't show them as an option for schools to select. 

When this happens and a school can no longer select their previously used choices for the new academic year, we'll simply ask them the questions for these programme details again, as outlined below.

You can read more about why we chose to use this approach [in the design history entry here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/saving-default-choices/).

> ### Giving an ECT's appropriate body when the school in't reusing previous programme details

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Giving an ECT’s appropriate body when the school isn’t reusing previous programme details
```

Reviewer 4: Fixed in https://github.com/DFE-Digital/register-early-career-teachers-public/pull/325/commits/5bb7b5b433f25f782d9748df41b67d17cf49147d

If they do it immediately, they're taken to the journey to assign a mentor.

More about the process for assigning a mentor is given in the sections below, but we still don't see ECTs as fully registered until they have a mentor.

### Assigning a mentor through the ECTs page

Mentors can also be assigned later, if the school doesn't have the information or time to do it immediately after registering an ECT.

Currently, a school user would only be able to do this by going to the 'ECTs' page.

There would be a prompt next to every ECT that has a saved record to assign a mentor, if they don't already have one.

If the school user selects to assign the ECT a mentor, they're taken into the journey to assign a mentor.

### Deciding if the mentor is new or a previously registered mentor

Regardless of where the journey to assign a mentor starts, schools are taken to a question where they are asked if they're assigning a mentor they've already registered, or registering a new mentor.

> This will show all existing mentors that are still actively at the school - they have a open mentor_at_school period.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This will show all existing mentors that are still actively at the school - they have a open `mentor_at_school_period`.
```

Reviewer 4: Fixed in: https://github.com/DFE-Digital/register-early-career-teachers-public/pull/325/commits/5bb7b5b433f25f782d9748df41b67d17cf49147d

If we still cannot confirm the user knows both the TRN and either national insurance number or date of birth, we tell them the record cannot be found.

Neither date of birth or national insurance number should be stored longer-term. It is just used for the initial finding and checking of a mentor's record in the TRS. You can read more [about our reasoning for this here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/no-longer-storing-date-of-birth/).

If the mentor does not have teacher reference number, we take school users to a page that informs they of how to either [Find a lost TRN](https://find-a-lost-trn.education.gov.uk/start) or [request a new TRN for the mentor](https://www.gov.uk/guidance/teacher-reference-number-trn#if-youre-a-mentor-for-a-trainee-or-early-career-teacher).

### Confirming or correcting a mentor's name

> Once we've decided the mentor can be added to the service, we play back the name from the TRA's Teaching Record System to the user. This is so we can show them it's linked to their teacher record and that they must be intending to register that person.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once we've decided the mentor can be added to the service, we playback the name from the TRA's Teaching Record System to the user. This is so we can show them it's linked to their teacher record and that they must be intending to register that person.
```

We give users the option to either:

* confirm the name is correct and continue
* correct the name and continue

We did this because:

* we know the name held in the TRS is often out of date
* we want lead providers to have correct contact details for mentors
* we don't want to block schools from registering someone because the name of the mentor may have been updated

If the name is corrected, we will continue to show the corrected name in the service from this point. We will continue to store the name from the TRS, so we can monitor if this feature is being used correctly, and it's not being overwritten with names that are completely different.

You can read more about why we chose to change how a mentor's name is gathered [in the design history entry here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/correcting-names/).

### Registering a mentor who has been registered before at another school

We still need to define what happens here.

### Giving a mentor's email address

The school user is asked for that mentor's email address.

> We check the email address given and make sure it doesn't exist for an ongoing ECT or mentor record with a different TRN. This would mean any emails that are attached to an open ect_at_school period. This is because we shouldn't have email addresses that are the same for entirely different people, when both are are still undergoing training.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We check the email address given and make sure it doesn't exist for an ongoing ECT or mentor record with a different TRN. This would mean any emails that are attached to an open `ect_at_school_period`. This is because we shouldn't have email addresses that are the same for entirely different people, when both are are still undergoing training.
```

Reviewer 4: Fixed in: https://github.com/DFE-Digital/register-early-career-teachers-public/pull/325/commits/5bb7b5b433f25f782d9748df41b67d17cf49147d

If a mentor is being assigned to a provider-led ECT for the first-time, we'll check if that mentor can receive provider-led mentor training.

In order to receive provider-led mentor training, the mentor must:

* not have taken part in early-rollout mentor training, which was done in the beginning when the ECF was launched
* not have completed provider-led mentor training historically
* not have started provider-led mentor training and taken too long to finish, as defined by policy and submitted to the digital service annually

If the mentor is being assigned to a provider-led ECT and can receive provider-led mentor training, we'll inform the school of this.

We'll tell the school we'll pass on the mentor details to the same lead provider they used when registering an ECT.

We still need to define what happens when a mentor is being assigned to a school-led ECT for the first time. They might still legitimately be able to undertake provider-led training as a mentor, and we know some mentors do do this!

We're also working on a way for a school to tell us if the lead provider for a mentor is different.

### Checking answers for the registration of a new mentor

> We play back all the details submitted for that mentor, and remind the school user of the ECT the mentor will be assigned to.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We play back all the details submitted for that mentor and remind the school user of the ECT to whom the mentor will be assigned.
```

* it alters what funding the ECT might be eligible for

You can read more about why we chose to add this question [in the design history entry here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/ects-start-date/).

We’ll update this later with more information on the validation and rules for the start date that can be given. 

### Giving an ECT’s working pattern

We always ask for the working pattern for an ECT so:

* the ECT can be onboarded to the correct kind of training with a lead provider
* the lead provider or delivery partner can enquire more with the school for part-time ECTs, to make sure they have all the information they need and are fully supported
* we better understand the kinds of ECTs undergoing training 

This question is new for Register early career teachers, so the working pattern field will not be populated for migrated records.

You can read more about why we chose to add this question [in the design history entry here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/asking-schools-whether-an-ect-is-full-or-part-time/).

### Generating an expected training start year

> The expected training start year is generated from when the ECT is registered and when the school reports the ECT is starting. This is because if an ECT had started at a school in January 2024, which would be in the 2023 to 2024 academic year, but they’re not registered by school till September 2024, they wouldn’t be starting with a lead provider for training until the 2024 to 2025 academic year. Essentially, training can’t be expected to start until they’re registered with DfE and have their details passed to a lead provider. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expected training start year is generated from when the ECT is registered and when the school reports the ECT is starting. This is because if an ECT had started at a school in January 2024, which would be in the 2023 to 2024 academic year, but they’re only registered by the school in September 2024, they wouldn’t be starting with a lead provider for training until the 2024 to 2025 academic year. Essentially, training can’t be expected to start until they’re registered with DfE and have their details passed to a lead provider. 
```

The school start date provided might impact what lead provider information a school user selects.

If a school has registered an ECT using previously used programme details, if they decide to change the appropriate body, lead provider, delivery partner or programme type, we’d also just take them back to the question if they want to use previously used programme details again. This simplifies the build and also makes sure they don’t pick any options that might not be feasible.

Once a school confirms the details, it saves the details for that ECT. The ECT record is created, with a status of ‘mentor required’. It creates an ECT record that can be viewed on the ‘ECTs’ page. However, registration is still not finished!

<a id="assigning_a_mentor"></a>

## Assigning a mentor to an ECT

### Assigning a mentor immediately after giving ECT details

Registration is only finished when an ECT is also given a mentor.

> All ECTs need mentors. Whilst they can be eligible for training before this, usually missing mentors means mentors don’t undergo mentor training as they should, and it also means any mentors not assigned to an ECT won’t receive funding.

Reviewer 3: Mentor funding point here isn't clear - the school gets funding for mentors based on the ECT, so this is specifically about funding for mentor training that they provider would miss out on

Worth also mentioning if a mentor isn't assigned for a provider-led ECT they might not be provided with access to the ECT's materials

Author: ive tried to improve this will share with you

If they do it immediately, they’re taken to the journey to assign a mentor.

More about the process for assigning a mentor is given in the sections below, but we still don’t see ECTs as fully registered until they have a mentor.

### Assigning a mentor through the ECTs page

Mentors can also be assigned later, if the school doesn’t have the information or time to do it immediately after registering an ECT.

Currently, a school user would only be able to do this by going to the ‘ECTs’ page.

There would be a prompt next to every ECT that has a saved record to assign a mentor, if they don’t already have one.

If the school user selects to assign the ECT a mentor, they’re taken into the journey to assign a mentor.

### Deciding if the mentor is new or a previously registered mentor

Regardless of where the journey to assign a mentor starts, schools are taken to a question where they are asked if they’re assigning a mentor they’ve already registered, or registering a new mentor.

> This will show all existing mentors that are still actively at the school - they have a open `mentor_at_school_period`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will show all existing mentors that are still actively at the school - they have an open `mentor_at_school_period`.
```

We give users the option to either:

* confirm the name is correct and continue
* correct the name and continue

We did this because:

* we know the name held in the TRS is often out of date
* we want lead providers to have correct contact details for mentors
* we don’t want to block schools from registering someone because the name of the mentor may have been updated

If the name is corrected, we will continue to show the corrected name in the service from this point. We will continue to store the name from the TRS, so we can monitor if this feature is being used correctly, and it’s not being overwritten with names that are completely different.

You can read more about why we chose to change how a mentor’s name is gathered [in the design history entry here](https://teacher-cpd.design-history.education.gov.uk/ecf-v2/correcting-names/).

### Registering a mentor who has been registered before at another school

We still need to define what happens here.

### Giving a mentor’s email address

The school user is asked for that mentor’s email address.

> We check the email address given and make sure it doesn’t exist for an ongoing ECT or mentor record with a different TRN. This would mean any emails that are attached to an open `ect_at_school_period`. This is because we shouldn’t have email addresses that are the same for entirely different people, when both are are still undergoing training.

Reviewer 3: or mentor_at_school period

This avoids a scenario where two different people are given the same email address. If their lead provider was the same, the lead provider would be unable to set them up with unique accounts for their learning platform.

In addition, it prevents us sending privacy notes or other communication intended for the other person.

We also make sure the email follows a correct format.

### Checking if a mentor can receive mentor training

> If a mentor is being assigned to a provider-led ECT for the first-time, we’ll check if that mentor can receive provider-led mentor training.

Reviewer 3: funded provider-led training

> In order to receive provider-led mentor training, the mentor must:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to receive funded provider-led mentor training, the mentor must:
```
